NOTE: The general idea of this system was lifted from a GDC talk on Context
Aware Dialogue systems in The Last of Us.  I have some notes on that talk
including the presenter's name which I will endeavour to add to these notes
when possible.  The system they were using was to drive the audio system in
their game but it struck me that this could be a general purpose system and it
could reasonably drive a story-based narrative. This system is a first pass
attempt at exploring this idea.

Story -> 1 or more Conversations
         1 or more Actors

Conversation -> 1 or more Dialogues
                1 or more Actors

Dialog -> Graph of expressions
          (Directed? Tree?)
          Flow of idea exchanges
          Contributes to "facts" and "experience"

Actors -> Have Traits (e.g inclinations)
            - Emotions
            - Preferences
            - Superstitions
          Goals (e.g. attempt to persuade)
          Abilities (e.g. insightful, intuitive, )
            - Detect lies
            - Physiognomy
                - Detect culture
                - Detect traits
                - Detect abilities
            - Empathy
                - Detect emotion
                - Affects emotion
            - Manipulation
                - Avoids lie detection
                - Causes words to slip
          Knowledge
            - Facts
            - Experiences
          Expressions
            - Words
            - Body language
            - Facial expressions
            - Visible emotion display (e.g. crying)
            - Tone of voice

Universe -> The state of all Actor Knowledge
            Also includes world state not known to any actor
            Updates over time
                - information travels through a social network
                  at a fixed interval

I'd like to avoid having to hand-code a dialogue tree. This is especially true
given a large possible narrative space. A binary tree is exponential and leads
to repetitive and boring interaction. I'd rather have a large number of things
to talk about based on an actors knowledge, goals and traits.

I'm not sure how to represent the data for dialogues. Since a dialog may be
triggered only if the Actor has a particular disposition towards the other
Actor in the conversation. It may also only be triggered if certain facts are
known to the Actor (e.g. through direct experience or through social
connections).

What is really the case is that given a particular fixed universe there is a
finite and fixed number of possible dialogues. At any time all possible dialog
for a particular Actor is filtered based on what can and cannot be said. The
remaining dialog could be scored for relevance ... somehow ...

In the most basic form, two actors (one human, one computer) should be able to
engage in a conversation from the command line. The only thing that
differentiates a human and a computer would be that a computer's options are
scored and the next branch is selected (maybe based on personality? abilities?)
while a human is presented with a list of options (e.g. top 3 to 5 possible
dialogues)

It will be a challenge to represent so much text - potentially 10k+ lines of
dialogue - in a clear way. I recall the talk with Naughty Dog where they stored
the dialogue inside Lisp files. Ultimately I'd consider building an editor and
a way to visualize the narrative graph. For a first pass, I would consider JSON
simply for its ubiquity and ease to work with.

Another challenge is to represent what an Actor "knows", especially in the
context of filtering dialogue based on that knowledge. One thought that comes
to mind is to have a list of "all that is knowable" and limit it to particular
types (e.g. boolean, string, number/int, etc.)

I imagine a tick, where events that happen in the world are experienced first
hand by some actors. On subsequent ticks, these facts are transmitted through
social networks to other actors. In this way, knowledge of events in the world
propagates.

In the simple case, a tick could be run on each response from a human actor. In
some cases time advancing may make no difference to the outcome of a
conversation, e.g.  a two person Story with no world events. The tick could,
for example look like:

    Story Tick
        - World
            - events trigger based on time
        - Universe
            - updates with a new World state
        - Actors
            - direct experience is updated
            - process the previous dialogue
            - update their knowledge and emotions
            - re-evaluate their goals
            - change expression
            - filter available dialogue
            - rank available dialogue
        - Universe
            - update with new Actor state
        - Actors
            - take turns exchanging dialogue

The Story feels like the top-most element in that the story could contain the
Universe, the World (maybe the world could be thought of as a type of Actor?),
the Actors, and Time.

I'm not certain what types (e.g. class vs struct) I should make for each of
Story, Actor, etc. so for now I'll make them all classes and give it more
thought.

I also need to consider how to model the social network between the actors. The
actors will be having conversations (e.g. even those actors not conversing
directly with a human) in order to transfer information through the Universe.

The knowledge in the Universe would be hierarchical. That is, there is all
information and then there is information known to groups and information known
to individuals.  It may be best to include Actors in groups so that cultural
information is easy to set up and users that have a single information source
(e.g. a news broadcast network) can more easily and efficiently represent their
knowledge state. In a more complex sense not all information from a broadcast
source (e.g. a radio program, a news paper) would be known to all members (e.g.
only skimmed headlines, missed a few pieces of detail).

I'd also like to consider unreliability in knowledge. An Actor with low
intelligence may misinterpret information they gather. Actors with particular
traits (e.g.  superstitions, prejudices) may color information with false
understanding.

The idea of Actors having Goals is interesting to me as well. In a conversation
with multiple dialogues, the Actor may wish to focus on a particular dialogue
or they may wish to gain particular information. They may be motivated to
persuade or deceive a human actor. They may wish to withhold some information.
They may have information on what the human actor knows and attempt to coerce
that information from them. They may have the ability to "read your expression"
to accurately tell if you are lying.

Many of these features would work especially well with other game mechanics. A
world outside of the dialogue. Actor progression (e.g. gaining abilities,
maturity).

Ideally the goal is to have Actors learn about the human player through their
conversations and their knowledge of the human's conversations with others in
order to provide a deep conversation mechanic leading to an immersive story.

